---
layout: post
title: "Problem 7 - 10001st prime"
date: 2015-07-26 09:11
number: 7
---

## Question

By listing the first six prime numbers: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and 13, we can see that the 6th prime is 13.

What is the 10 001st prime number?

## Answer

Now, some of the previous problems I've used a package called `primesieve`, which would make solving this problem extremely trivial. However, that is not in the spirit of the problem, and so I will use another method to find it.

It has been shown that given a number $$n$$, which can be either prime or composite, one only needs to check integers up until the $$\sqrt{n}$$ to see if the number is prime. Because the bound is relatively small, we can get away with this starting point. The function `isPrime` will take a number and return `True` and `False` depending on if the number is prime or not. If the number is even then it does not bother checking all integers, and returns `True` immediately. Otherwise, it starts from 3, and checks all odd numbers up until $$\sqrt{n}$$.

```python
def isPrime(n):
    if n <= 1:
        return False
    elif n % 2 == 0:
        return False
    count = 3
    while count ** 2 <= n:
        if n % count == 0:
            return False
        count = count + 2
    return True
```

Now we just have to iterate starting from 3, and keep track of the number of primes we've encountered.

```python
numOfPrimes = 1
num = 1
while numOfPrimes < 10001:
    num = num + 2
    if isPrime(num):
        numOfPrimes = numOfPrimes + 1
print(num)
```

Running the above code results in an output of:

```python
104743
0.6904462222222222 seconds.
```

The timing might seem a bit slow, but for the purposes of this problem, it is satisfactory. Future problems might require us to do something much more clever, especially if finding prime numbers is only a step in the problem, rather than the problem itself.